# functional-kidney-imaging

### *Measurement of Renal Perfusion and Filtration with MRI* (Syllabus)

[Arvid Lundervold](http://www.uib.no/en/persons/Arvid.Lundervold), BSc, MD, PhD

[Department of Biomedicine](http://www.uib.no/en/biomedisin), University of Bergen & 
[Department of Radiology](http://www.helse-bergen.no/en/OmOss/Avdelinger/radiologisk/Sider/default.aspx), Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway  - [Computational Medicine](http://computationalmedicine.no)

#### [ESMRMB 2016 Congress](http://www.esmrmb.org/index.php?id=/en/index/esmrmb_2016_congress.htm) - 33rd Annual Scientific Meeting, Vienna, Austria  

[Teaching Session](http://www.esmrmb.org/index.php?id=/en/index/esmrmb_2016_congress/programme/teaching_programme.htm): Functional kidney imaging with MRI (adv.)

Thursday 29-SEP-2016, 0800-0830 

Github: https://github.com/arvidl/functional-kidney-imaging
 
---


#### ABSTRACT

Kidney function is related to maintenance of fluids, electrolytes,
acid-base balance and clearance of toxins. Normal kidney function is
maintained by coordinated regulation at different levels of organization
warranting an integrative approach to kidney function in health and
disease.

Important parameters describing kidney physiology and function are:
**renal plasma flow**, RPF = (1 – *Hct*) · RBF, where *Hct* (hematocrit)
is the fraction of blood volume representing the cellular elements of
blood, RBF is the volume of blood delivered to the kidneys per unit time
[mL/min]; **renal perfusion**, denoting renal blood flow per unit
volume of kidney [mL/min/100 mL]; and **glomerular filtration rate**,
GFR, the volume of fluid filtered from the renal glomerular capillaries
into Bowman’s capsule per unit time, equal to the sum of the filtration
rates of all functioning nephrons [mL/min]. Typical values in healthy
humans: Hct \~0.40, RPF \~600 mL/min, GFR \~125 mL/min (70-kg man, where
population studies have shown GFR to be proportional to body surface
area, and sex and age dependent).

This teaching session will introduce measurement of renal perfusion and
filtration in the framework of **imaging-based biomarkers** and
**computational medicine** / **systems medicine**.

(**i**) The first part will give a brief overview of kidney structure
and function and the key physiological parameters relevant to the
clinics. In particular, we describe the gross **functional anatomy of
the kidney**, the renal blood supply, and the ultrastructure of the
filtration barrier, as well as some major diseases and conditions
affecting normal perfusion and filtration. To complete this motivational
part, we mention assessment of kidney function in the clinical
laboratory based on the measurement of the **clearance** of various
substances (exogenous and endogenous markers) by the kidneys,
incorporating the “**conservation of mass**” principle also underlying
imaging-based modeling of renal perfusion and filtration.

(**ii**) The second part addresses MR acquisition techniques in use for
measuring perfusion and filtration, with a focus on **DCE-MRI**.

(**iii**) This part presents **tracer kinetics** and **compartment
models** applied to parenchymal regions down to single voxels, where
**motion correction** can be an issue.

(**iv**) In the fourth part, model-based estimation of renal perfusion
and filtration using different numerical **software** and programming
languages will be demonstrated.

Finally, we will point to relevant literature, software tools, and new
initiatives addressing the lack of standardization in acquisition and
analysis methods, limited access to data from previous studies, and the
challenges of **reproducibility** and **validation**.

---

#### REFERENCES

[1] Eikefjord E, Andersen E, Hodneland E, Zöllner F, Lundervold A,
Svarstad E, Rørvik J. Use of 3D DCE-MRI for the estimation of renal
perfusion and glomerular filtration rate: an intrasubject comparison of
FLASH and KWIC with a comprehensive framework for evaluation. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2015;204:273-281. [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25714312)]

[2] Eikefjord E, Andersen E, Hodneland E, Hanson EA, Lundervold A,
Sourbron S, Svarstad E, Rørvik J. The repeatability, accuracy, and
precision of renal function measurements using 1.5 T dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI and the reference method iohexol-GFR. To appear in
Acta Radiologica.

[3] Grenier N, Merville P, Combe. C Radiologic imaging of the renal
parenchyma structure and function. Nat Rev Nephrol 2016;12:348–359.
[[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27067530)]

[4] Hodneland E, Hanson EA, Lundervold A, Modersitzki J, Eikefjord E,
Munthe-Kaas AZ. Segmentation-driven image registration - application to
4D DCE-MRI recordings of the moving kidneys. IEEE Trans Image Process
2014;23:2392-2404. [[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24710831)]

[5] Koeppen BM, Stanton BA. Renal Physiology, 5th ed, Mosby, 2013.
[[Elsevier](https://elsevier.ca/product.jsp?isbn=9780323086912)]

[6] Layton AT, Edwards A. Mathematical Modeling in Renal Physiology,
Springer, 2014. [[Springer](http://www.springer.com/la/book/9783642273667)]

[7] Sourbron SP, Michaely HJ, Reiser MF, Schoenberg SO.
MRI-measurement of perfusion and glomerular filtration in the human
kidney with a separable compartment model. Invest Radiol 2008;43:40-48.
[[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18097276)]

[8] Turner N et al. Oxford Textbook of Clinical Nephrology, 4th ed,
OUP, 2016. [[Oxford](http://oxfordmedicine.com/view/10.1093/med/9780199592548.001.0001/med-9780199592548)]

---

#### KEYWORDS

*Kidney function*; *Computational medicine*; *Imaging-based biomarkers*; *DCE-MRI*; *Compartment modeling*; *Software tools*

---
